A passion for all things baseball probably started one hot St. Louis summer when the city held its breath during every Mark McGwire at-bat. But it grew roots and flourished during the hours, innings, and years spent splitting my time between Vanderbilt University’s Blair School of Music and Hawkins Field. Only the warmest regards for the Musicology and Ethnomusicology faculty (Jim Lovensheimer, Melanie Lowe, Joy Calico, James Maiello, and Doug Shadle) who challenged my thinking and writing, modeled compelling teaching and research, and gave me a foundation for the critical interdisciplinary inquiry that’s been a central part of my growth as a scholar and teacher. This dissertation, and the larger arc of my research agenda, started with idea of studying music tourism and professional baseball. I owe a debt of gratitude to Senior Lecturer Robbie Fry for providing top-notch mentoring and professional development support and directing the thesis project that launched my fascination with Minor League Baseball. That fascination took root in the hours spent at Vanderbilt baseball games and Minor League games across the southeastern U.S. I’m profoundly grateful to the players, coaches, fans (Mike, Dave, and the Section K gang), and front-office staff who made it possible for me to gain a deep appreciation for the game as played outside the Major League limelight. Go Dores, and #VandyBoys for life.
<br></br>
A Bachelor of Music degree candidate was probably not the most logical fit for an American Studies-Sport Studies PhD program, and I remember vividly the bench I fell onto after receiving a fully-funded offer from the University of Iowa’s program. I’ve been privileged to walk through graduate school with a community of mentors and colleagues (Susan Birrell, Tina Parratt, Travis Vogan, Laura Rigal, Laura Kastens, Lauren Rabinovitz, Diane Williams, Diann Rosza, James Oudenhaven, Cathryn Lucas, Matt Hodler, Eileen Narcotta-Welp, Dain TePoel, Chris Henderson, Taylor Henry, and others) who share an interest in critical approaches to sport and U.S. culture more broadly. I’m honored to be part of the program’s legacy of critical feminist scholarship and grateful to be part of an intellectual community that is equal parts generative and empowering.
I knew I wanted interdisciplinarity to be part of my graduate training, and the range of courses I took in the American Studies, Sport Studies, GWSS, Communication Studies, History, and Journalism/Mass Communication Departments confirmed that hunch. Huzzah for true interdisciplinarity, even if the semester of three critical theory seminars made my brain hurt. Special thanks to Susan Stanfield and Gigi Durham whose examples of collaborative, student-first approaches to the graduate seminar were transformative experiences.
<br></br>
I also knew growing as a teacher of college students was going to be part of my graduate training. Three wonderfully generative years spent teaching the Department of Rhetoric’s general education curriculum fostered an interest in critical digital pedagogy and digital scholarship more broadly. I guess I’m saying my professional trajectory is largely your fault, and y’all should wear it like a badge of honor. I continue (often on a daily basis) to be profoundly grateful I started my graduate teaching career in a community of colleagues and mentors (Megan Knight, David Gooblar, Matt Gilchrist, Perry Howell, Katherine Ostdiek, Anna Williams, Kate Nesbitt, and so many others) wholly dedicated to effective, radical pedagogy. Thank you for grounding me in the literature, training me to examine my practices, and giving me the tools to experiment and iterate with students. Plus y’all let me design my own course and teach Sport Rhetoric for two years, which was pretty great.
A desire for formal digital coursework to support the digital assignments I was giving students led me to the School of Library and Information Science, which was then home to the Graduate Certificate in Public Digital Humanities. One semester of DH Theory and Practice later, and I was hooked. Finding my way to the SLIS hallway on the Main Library’s third floor remains one of my graduate career’s most fortuitous moments of serendipity. Again, everything that’s happened since is your fault, in the best possible way.
<br></br>
The DH Certificate grew into a full-fledged second MA in Library and Information Science, because conventional wisdom absolutely recommends adding a second professional degree program while taking comprehensive exams and starting a dissertation. I’ve had a few key moments in my academic and professional life when I realize I’m enjoying something I’m also good at, and I’ve learned to pay attention to those moments. My time in the SLIS program was one of those moments. Who knew you could think critically about information, learn technical skills, and be part of a generally awesome librarian community. The fierce cadre of library school + digital humanist colleagues and mentors (Katie Hassman, Janalyn Moss, Stephanie Blalock, Amy Chen, Colleen Theisen, Judith Pascoe, David McCartney, Kären Mason, Janet Weaver, Sarah Bond, Rebekah Walker, Annie Tunnicliff, Amanda Jenkins, Mary Wise, Brady Krien, Aiden Bettine, Kara Logsden, Katie Buehner, Iulian Vamanu, Duncan Stewart, and SO MANY OTHERS) have been instrumental in honing my DH chops, modeling meaningful collaboration, and equipping me to pursue an academic professional future that I couldn’t have imagined at the start of grad school.
<br></br>
My path through grad school took a few internship and fellowship turns. Being a Library Research Intern at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in Cooperstown meant having the baseball summer of a lifetime in the name of research and professional development. Sincere thanks to the Frank and Peggy Steele Internship Program for Youth Leadership Development (and the always awesome reference librarian Cassidy Lent) for the opportunity to spend a summer immersed in baseball primary source materials, surrounded by people who love baseball as much as I do (#SteeleCurtain).
<br></br>
A reference question I fielded during the Cooperstown internship turned into a fellowship at the Library of Congress the following summer. Bringing my academic world full circle, I spent ten weeks in the Music Division of our national library, working to build the definitive list of baseball-related print music. [Yes, I spent an entire summer on a baseball music scavenger hunt at the Library of Congress.] I owe a debt of gratitude to Susan Clermont, Robin Rausch, the Library’s Junior Fellowship program (Kaleena Black and her team), as well as the incredible colleagues and mentors I worked with over that summer. I didn’t fully realize it at the time, but that fellowship was a crash course in meaningful collaboration, effective project management, thorough metadata, and data wrangling. Messy data isn’t so scary after you’ve stared down a spreadsheet of 2,000 thematic print music records.
<br></br>
An international job search ended just sixty five miles from the University of Iowa at Grinnell. To paraphrase Leslie Knope quoting Teddy Roosevelt, I’ve found my team, and we get to work hard at work worth doing. I’m grateful for colleagues (Liz Rodrigues, Sarah Purcell, Carolyn Lewis, Mo Pelzel, Erik Simpson, our Vivero Digital Scholarship Fellows, and many others) who’ve supported me professionally and personally while finishing the dissertation and working full time. May we all continue to be feminist killjoys. 
<br></br>
All dissertations are hard, but ones that advocate for a more expanded definition of what counts as scholarship present additional challenges. A huge thanks to the awesome folks on my committee (Tom Oates, Lindsay Mattock, Jennifer Sterling, Deborah Whaley, and Darrel Wanzer-Serrano) for hanging in there, fielding questions, and navigating bureaucracy.
* Tom and Lindsay, thanks for being willing to take on the unexpected and supporting me and the project every step of the way. The scope, definition, and interdisciplinarity of the project are a credit to your effective co-directing. 
* Jen—thank you for being a sounding board and helping position this project at the intersection of digital studies and sport studies. 
* Deborah—thank you for being a tireless advocate for alternative forms of scholarship, digital approaches, and graduate students within the department and on campus. 
* Darrel—thank you for helping me find my academic voice and creating a space where I could explore what it might look like to bring together my digital and disciplinary interests. Echoes of your feedback on my writing are now part of my own internal editorial voice. 
* Laura Kastens, the phantom member of all American Studies committees—thank you for graciously handling schedule wrangling, dual degree paperwork, and all the other adventures in academic bureaucracy. 
<br></br>
<div style="text-align: left">Turns out the challenges that come with dissertations that advocate for expanded definitions of scholarship involve collaborators beyond the core committee. More moving parts = more people. From Heidi Arbisi-Kelm and Erin Kaufman in the Graduate College to Paul Soderdahl, Wendy Robertson, and Daniel Johnson in the Libraries, digital dissertation projects truly do take a village. I’m grateful to be part of an all-star lineup at the University of Iowa that’s ahead of the game in supporting graduate students who want to take on new types of dissertation projects. The Digital Studio for Scholarship and Publishing made it possible for me to access the data used in the project, and Nikki White and Rob Shephard have been significant collaborators on the data analysis and visualization portions of the project from its earliest stages. 
<br></br>
National data suggests we need to have a meaningful conversation about graduate education’s mental and emotional toll. My experience is no exception, so I’m grateful for the chosen family, steadfast friends, and spiritual community that have been anchors and lifelines, always challenging me to “live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave Himself for me” (Galatians 2:20). Thanks for letting me pull up a chair at your tables, hang out with your families, and cry on your shoulders as we serve Christ together. 
</div>
