# Conclusion

<p>More broadly, the issue of globalized professional baseball labor raises questions about the legal frameworks, diplomatic relationships, and foreign policy structures by which players born outside the United States become eligible to participate in “the national pastime.” If Major League Baseball’s relationship with the Negro Leagues and Latin American professional leagues during the 20th century is any indication, exploitative relationships and extractive models of capital development may continue to shape how Major League Baseball relates to other professional baseball entities and organizations.</p>
<p>Far from an abstract conversation about organizational structures and transaction procedures, those relationships between MLB and other professional leagues and between MLB and international player labor sources directly impact the lived experience of increasing numbers of Minor League players. As outlined by Gilbert, free agency restrictions, salary protections, and draft procedures that empowered players in the 1960s and 1970s also inspired a Minor League labor system in which players exist in poorly-defined, fundamentally-precarious labor conditions. Pointing out the widespread erasure of Minor League labor across a range of cultural domains highlights how centering Minor League Baseball as an object of study provides an entry point for broader discussions of labor, power, and ideology.</p>
<p>The arguments and evidence presented in this dissertation take up a sustained analysis of specific aspects of Minor League Baseball. In doing so, this dissertation emphasizes the need to consider Minor League Baseball when attempting to fully understand the full dimensions of U.S. professional baseball. This dissertation also highlights the ways in which Minor League labor is often obscured or misrepresented. The analysis taken up in this dissertation underscores four central arguments. First, that the labor structures governing Minor League Baseball have developed in ways that strategically disenfranchise Minor League players. Despite efforts to frame U.S. professional baseball as an inclusive, fraternal space, this dissertation points out how the interests of team owners and executives are most often at odds with laborers’ concerns and priorities, as evidenced by protracted labor battle free agency in the 1970s and more recent lobbying efforts undertaken to secure passage for the Save America’s Pastime.</p>
<p>Second, that the labor organizing efforts that have been largely successful in advocating for Major League players have failed to consistently, thoroughly, and effectively advocate on behalf of Minor League players, which represent 90% of the overall labor pool purportedly represented by the MLBPA. While labor activism and organizing efforts have been largely successful in securing workplace protections and other benefits like free agency for Major League players, issues related to professional baseball’s global workforce and presence, as well as the precarity experienced by Minor League players, have not been topics of discussion and negotiation deemed worthy of serious pursuit and debate.</p>
<p>Third, that substantively considering the impact of globalization on U.S. professional baseball requires looking at Minor League teams and players, which represent roughly 90% of U.S. professional baseball teams and players. Shaped by U.S. imperialist attitudes and sport as a transnational commodity, Minor League Baseball emerges as a dynamic, global site that complicates attempts to frame U.S. professional baseball as a strictly “national” pastime. This dissertation argues that Minor League labor constitutes the clear majority of U.S. professional baseball labor and, in the second half of the twentieth century, has become a fundamentally global industry and commodity.</p> 
<p>Fourth, that dominant cultural representations of U.S. professional baseball most often fail to accurately portray the game’s cultural history and contemporary reality. Increasingly, those messages are constructed and disseminated via digital media platforms. As U.S. professional baseball has built a significant digital marketing apparatus, those platforms are rarely used by teams and owners to grapple with more complex realities about the sport’s meaning and cultural significance. By looking at alternate strategies for representation, this section of the dissertation emphasizes the ways players and fans have also used those same digital platforms to present alternate perspectives about the cultural significance of U.S. professional baseball and the lived experience of U.S. professional baseball players.</p> 
<p>Class-action lawsuits like Miranda v. Selig and Senne v. MLB have proven largely unsuccessful in changing the material working conditions for Minor League players, and the lobbying efforts undertaken to secure passage of the Save America’s Pastime Act clearly indicate the entrenched power structures that resist significant change to Minor League labor structures. However, the visibility and shifting conversation generated by the Save America’s Pastime Act (both iterations) and the class-action lawsuits have brought increased attention to the working conditions of Minor League players. While historical precedent gives little reason for optimism in terms of changing the plight of Minor League laborers, the shifting conversation within the baseball community Minor League labor, the politics of free agency, and the management of baseball labor suggests some combination of those issues will animate negotiations around baseball labor in the coming years.</p> 
<p>In the 2017-18 offseason, a significant number of veteran free agents (established Major League players over the age of thirty) remained unsigned free agents well into the spring training period. That unusual phenomenon prompted the MLBPA to hold its own spring training camp for unsigned free agents.<sup><a href="#fn146" id="ref146">146</a></sup> According to the MLBPA, “’upward of 30’ players” participated in the MLBPA-run camp. Similar concerns have animated the 2018-19 offseason, as several Major League free agents have gone unsigned, some choosing to accept Minor League contracts.</p>
<p>Additionally, the current free agency system has also raised significant concerns about the management of baseball labor. In the current system, the movement of players across Minor and Major League classifications is largely controlled by the Major League team. The current rules around free agency allow a Major League team to exclusively control a player’s labor until that player meets the minimum service time or number of years under contract to be eligible for free agency. To be eligible for free agency, a player must have accrued at least six years of service at the Major League level, and 172 days are considered a year of service. The rhetoric around Minor League Baseball as a meritocratic player development system might suggest that players move through the system based on their performance and merit. However, the way in which Major League teams have managed several recent high-profile cases indicates otherwise.</p>
<p>For example, by the end of the 2009 season, Rick Porcello had accrued 5 years and 170 days of service time, just 2 days shy of reaching free agency.<sup><a href="#fn147" id="ref147">147</a></sup> At the start of the 2010 season, the Detroit Tigers were able to assign Porcello to an affiliated Minor League team, to prevent him from earning the final two days of service time needed to be eligible for free agency. Similarly, in 2015, the Chicago Cubs assigned to an affiliated Minor League team for the first eight games of the season, to keep Bryant from becoming eligible for free agency that year.<sup><a href="#fn148" id="ref148">148</a></sup> Ronald Acuna experienced the same treatment—the Philadelphia Phillies assigned him to an affiliated Minor League team for the first three weeks of the season before having him rejoin the Major League team, just to be able to delay his free agency eligibility.<sup><a href="#fn149" id="ref149">149</a></sup></p>
<p>Where players are assigned at the start of the season is just mechanism teams use to manipulate free agency eligibility. However, how players move into the Major Leagues during the season has also increasingly come under fire. In the 2018, two Minor League players (Eloy Jiménez and Vladimir Guerrero Jr.) were experiencing successful seasons and were expected be promoted to their respective Major League teams toward the end of the season. However, neither player was promoted. As stated by Jiménez’s agent Nelson Montes De Oca, “’I don’t see what boxes he needs to check to be called up … except for service time.’”<sup><a href="#fn150" id="ref150">150</a></sup> According to Jiménez’s other agent Paul Kinzer, “’It’s not about the money. It’s the extra year of control.’”<sup><a href="#fn151" id="ref151">151</a></sup></p> 
<p>The MLBPA did speak publicly on Guerrero’s situation, making the following statement:</p>
<blockquote>"The union's position on service-time manipulation is clear, Vladimir Guerrero Jr. and other great young talents around baseball have earned the right to play on the field for a major-league team. The decision to not to bring him up is a business decision, not a baseball decision. It's bad for the Blue Jays, it's bad for fans, it's bad for players and it's bad for the industry."<sup><a href="#fn152" id="ref152">152</a></sup></blockquote>  
<p>While paying lip service to the issue of service time manipulation, the MLBPA has proven largely ineffective in helping impacted players successfully level labor grievances against their Major League teams. Major League owners consistently argue decisions about player labor management are made based on performance and readiness. Additionally, players still under contract with a Major League organization are ill advised to file a grievance against the individuals that control their professional trajectory. Bryant’s grievance against the Cubs is still pending. Jiménez is one of the few players to publicly respond to the conversation about service time manipulation, writing a Player’s Tribune piece titled “I’m Ready,” which indirectly addressed the service time issue by talking about his desire and readiness to play in the Major Leagues.<sup><a href="#fn153" id="ref153">153</a></sup></p>
<p>With the current Collective Bargaining Agreement set to expire in 2021, the increased attention to free agency and service time manipulation will likely be central topics of discussion in negotiations for the next CBA. While the concerns raised by the MLBPA around those topics have focused on their impact on players who end up making a Major League roster and achieving the protections and benefits outlined in the CBA, any potential changes to free agency structures and eligibility will have a significant and direct impact on the working conditions and lived experience of Minor League laborers.</p> 
<p>The broader landscape of globalized professional baseball labor remains a more nebulous topic, with competing priorities and a wide range of motivating agendas for the parties involved. While the MLBPA may be poised to take on free agency and service time in the next round of CBA negotiations, the larger questions about an increasingly global baseball labor force have less clear next steps. The prospect of an international draft has been repeatedly tabled in CBA negotiations. The agreements that do exist around signing international players apply largely to players bypassing the Minor Leagues and going straight to a Major League team.<sup><a href="#fn154" id="ref154">154</a></sup></p>
<p>More broadly, the issue of globalized professional baseball labor raises questions about the legal frameworks, global structures, and labor practices by which players born outside the U.S. become eligible to participate in the “national pastime.” As evidenced by U.S. professional baseball’s history relationship with other organized baseball structures like the Negro Leagues, exploitative relationships and extractive models of capital development will likely continue to shape how U.S. professional baseball relates to and engages other existing baseball structures. The labor practices that have developed in U.S. professional baseball through the twentieth century have created a Minor League system in which an overwhelming majority of players exist in poorly-defined, fundamentally-precarious labor conditions. The labor activism efforts that have given Major League players increased autonomy and agency have also continued to marginalize and disenfranchise Minor League players. This dissertation addresses the far-reaching implications of Minor League Baseball—its structures, history, teams, and players—and how those structures have been represented and interpreted across a range of cultural domains. Writing Minor League labor back into the narratives makes a compelling argument for U.S. professional baseball—and specifically Minor League Baseball—as a dynamic cultural site, in which labor, power, and ideology combine in ways that impact the lived experiences of thousands of players every day.</p> 

# Endnotes

<br></br><sup id="fn146">146. Mark Feinsand, ["MLBPA Opens Camp for Unsigned Free Agents,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20180308053941/https://www.mlb.com/news/mlb-players-association-opens-free-agent-camp/c-266475874) *Major League Baseball,* 2018. <a href="#ref146" title="Jump back to footnote 146 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn147">147. FoxSports, ["Chicago Cubs Kris Bryant and the Service-Time Game,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20180605125902/https://www.foxsports.com/mlb/just-a-bit-outside/story/chicago-cubs-kris-bryant-service-time-when-to-call-up-prospects-031115) *Fox Sports,* 2015; Jason P. Skoda, ["Union Threatens Action after Cubs Send Kris Bryant to Minors,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228194027/https://www.mcall.com/sports/mc-cubs-send-kris-bryant-to-minors-20150330-story.html) *McCall,* 2015.<a href="#ref147" title="Jump back to footnote 147 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="148">148. Ibid.<a href="#ref148" title="Jump back to footnote 148 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="149">149. Mike Axisa, ["Instituting a Free Agency Age Could Solve the MLBPA’s Two Biggest Problems in the Next CBA,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20180908121159/https://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/instituting-a-free-agency-age-could-solve-the-mlbpas-two-biggest-problems-in-the-next-cba/) *CBS Sports,* 2018; Matt Snyder, ["Backlash Rightfully Growing over Service Time Manipulation by MLB Teams,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20181207134059/https://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/backlash-rightfully-growing-over-service-time-manipulation-by-mlb-teams) *CBS Sports,* 2018; CBS Sports, ["MLBPA Backs Vladimir Guerrero Jr., Slams Blue Jays in Service Time Manipulation Battle,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20180908140656/https://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/mlbpa-backs-vladimir-guerrero-jr-slams-blue-jays-in-service-time-manipulation-battle) *CBS Sports,* 2018.<a href="#ref149" title="Jump back to footnote 149 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="150">150. Jon Heyman, ["Eloy Jimenez's Camp Unhappy He's Unlikely to Play for White Sox This Year,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20190128043705/https://fancredsports.com/articles/jon-heyman-eloy-jimenezs-camp-unhappy-hes-unlike) *Fan Cred Sports,* 2018.<a href="#ref150" title="Jump back to footnote 150 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="151">151. Ibid.<a href="#ref151" title="Jump back to footnote 151 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="152">152. [Axisa](https://web.archive.org/web/20180908121159/https://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/instituting-a-free-agency-age-could-solve-the-mlbpas-two-biggest-problems-in-the-next-cba); Snyder, [“Backlash Rightfully Growing over Service Time Manipulation by MLB Teams”](https://web.archive.org/web/20181207134059/https://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/backlash-rightfully-growing-over-service-time-manipulation-by-mlb-teams); [“MLBPA Backs Vladimir Guerrero Jr., Slams Blue Jays in Service Time Manipulation Battle.”](https://web.archive.org/web/20180908140656/https://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/mlbpa-backs-vladimir-guerrero-jr-slams-blue-jays-in-service-time-manipulation-battle)<a href="#ref152" title="Jump back to footnote 152 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="153">153. Eloy Jiménez, ["I'm Ready,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20181210133419/https://www.theplayerstribune.com/en-us/articles/eloy-jimenez-white-sox-chicago-im-ready) *Player's Tribue,* 2018.<a href="#ref153" title="Jump back to footnote 153 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="154">154. Dave Sheinin and Karen DeYoung, ["MLB and Cuban Baseball Federation Reach Agreement ; Trump Administration Signals It Has Issues with the Deal,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20190226210613/https://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/baseball/ct-spt-mlb-cuba-defection-20181219-story.html) *Chicago Tribune,* 2018; Steve Adams, ["MLB Ratifies New NPB Posting System, Formally Announces Shohei Ohtani Will Be Posted Today,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20181021232453/https://www.mlbtraderumors.com/2017/12/mlb-ratifies-new-npb-posting-system-formally-announces-shohei-ohtani-will-be-posted-today.html) *MLB Trade Rumors,* 2017.<a href="#ref154" title="Jump back to footnote 154 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
