# Introduction
<p>Using a variety of data sources and analysis methods, this dissertation makes a content-based argument about professional baseball labor, framed against a larger backdrop of globalization, power, and representation. Scholars have addressed the problem of professional baseball labor through a variety of scholarly approaches. Literature that speaks to various facets of U.S. professional baseball labor—specifically globalization and desegregation—are key discourses that inform this dissertation. The literature review highlights how existing scholarship on U.S. professional baseball labor regularly overlooks Minor League Baseball (MiLB) as relevant or significant for baseball labor practices. In contrast, my dissertation proceeds from the core belief that Minor League Baseball is a dynamic, crucial site for baseball research and can speak to probative research questions on U.S. professional baseball’s labor history, cultural politics, and ideological significance—questions that have previously been addressed by studying Major League Baseball’s (MLB) teams and players.</p>
<p>Minor League players constitute nearly ninety percent of the overall U.S. professional labor force. Addressing the cultural significance and politics of U.S. professional baseball requires looking at multiple dimensions of the industry—not just Major League Baseball. By foregrounding or centering Minor League Baseball, this dissertation makes three overarching arguments. First, that considering Minor League Baseball is necessary to fully grasp the nuanced complexities of professional baseball as played in the United States. Second, that treating Minor League Baseball as a principal object of study reveals complex cultural and labor histories that are markedly different from the stories told and arguments made about Major League Baseball. Third, that centering Minor League Baseball structures and laborers brings to the forefront a body of evidence that provides new insights into U.S. professional baseball’s relationship with labor, globalization, and cultural representation.</p>
<p>Even in literature that does mention Minor League Baseball, traditional archival sources yield narratives that focus on specific players, organizations, countries, or regions. Lost in many of these analyses is the core relationships between U.S. professional baseball’s labor practices and the sport’s global reach. <sup><a href="#fn1" id="ref1">1</a></sup> Some texts adopt an encyclopedic approach that fails to consider the full scope or implications of baseball’s truly global presence and history alongside U.S. professional baseball’s long history of “national pastime” claims.<sup><a href="#fn2" id="ref2">2</a></sup>   Other works address specific countries or regions outside the United States.<sup><a href="#fn3" id="ref3">3</a></sup>  Focusing on specific players, places, or periods demonstrates the nuanced complexity in baseball’s cultural politics and illustrates how baseball has developed outside the United States and outside the umbrella of U.S. professional baseball.</p>
<p>However, such studies fail to offer the sense of global scale and transnational perspective needed to fully understand how U.S. professional baseball’s labor practices have become increasingly global and transnational. An alternate framework and methodology are needed to address the scale of Minor League labor, the impact of changing labor structures and conditions on the larger ecosystem of U.S. professional baseball, and the ways in which globalization has shaped U.S. professional baseball.  Such an investigation requires looking at U.S. professional baseball across time and space. This dissertation presents a framework that brings together a large-scale investigation of Minor League Baseball’s labor history, the impact of globalization on Minor League labor, and the cultural politics of Minor League Baseball. This dissertation also works to explain the processes keep Minor League labor hidden from mainstream view.</p>
<p>Highlighting the fundamental link between U.S. professional baseball’s labor practices and contested ideological terrain, labor historian Daniel Gilbert argues that “In addition to being about labor, baseball—like every sport—is fundamentally about territory. Baseball games involve a number of spatial struggles."<sup><a href="#fn4" id="ref4">4</a></sup>  For Gilbert, specific labor practices within U.S. professional baseball are the grounds on which debates around globalization and desegregation are negotiated. “As players in Major League Baseball (MLB) won new power in their industry through collective bargaining, team owners responded by creating more flexible modes of control over the recruitment and development of future generations of athletes…significantly expand(ing) their teams’ geographic reach, in search of top players and new fans.”<sup><a href="#fn5" id="ref5">5</a></sup>  The post-World War II regulation and control of baseball labor have shaped and continue to shape the sport’s increasingly global scope and influence, and the cultural politics of U.S. professional baseball, from debates around desegregation to discussions about the sport’s increasingly multicultural identity, can be seen as facets or consequences of the sport’s labor practices.</p> 
<p>Clearly, the problem of baseball labor raises questions and issues relevant to the cultural study of baseball. However, most scholars—including Gilbert—explore these topics by focusing almost exclusively on Major League Baseball.  As U.S. professional baseball’s labor structures were renegotiated through the second half of the twentieth century, a legal distinction was made between the highest level of U.S. professional baseball—Major League Baseball—and other teams that operate as a player development system for Major League teams—Minor League Baseball. Outside the national limelight Major League teams demand, Minor League Baseball has gone from small-town teams populated largely by U.S.-born players to a highly-structured player development system with global reach.<sup><a href="#fn6" id="ref6">6</a></sup>  Foregrounding Minor League Baseball is critical to understanding the full scope and history of professional game in the United States. Doing so also points out the various ways in which Minor League labor has remained largely unexamined and hidden from public view.</p>
<p>The University of Central Florida’s Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport has produced annual reports on diversity in Major League Baseball going back to 2004, and Society of American Baseball Research (SABR) records have tracked Major League demographics going back to 1947. However, no research has substantively addressed the intersection of the history of Minor League Baseball’s labor history and the impact of that history on the sport’s human laborers.<sup><a href="#fn7" id="ref7">7</a></sup>  In the time I have been working on this dissertation, the *Mother Jones* image is the only published visualization of Minor League data I have located. The limited public visualizations of data related to Minor League Baseball players is indicative of a larger theme of marginalized Minor League history and labor. While multiple large-scale data analysis and visualization projects have taken up globalization and career trajectory for Major League Baseball players, few projects have substantively considered or incorporated Minor League Baseball.</p>
<p>This dissertation takes up a data-driven critical analysis of the ways macro- and micro-level trends in Minor League Baseball relate to and complicate MLB-dominated narratives around globalization and desegregation in U.S. professional baseball labor. This dissertation presents arguments that address the following questions: 
<ul><li>How have MiLB demographics and global dimensions shifted over time?</li>
  <li>How do foreign-born players’ experience and trajectory in the Minor Leagues differ from their U.S.-born counterparts?</li>
  <li>How does an investigation of the MiLB data contradict or complicate existing MLB-dominant narratives and histories?</li>
  </ul>
<div style="text-align: left">By taking up these questions in the dissertation, I argue for the centrality and necessity of including Minor League Baseball when studying the sport’s labor practices labor and ideological significance through addressing how Minor League labor complicates or supplements existing understandings of the relationship between U.S. professional baseball’s global reach and “national pastime” claims.</p> 

## Section 1: Minor League Labor History
<p>The crux of this dissertation focuses on the post-WWII developments in U.S. professional baseball labor. However, understanding the unique—and often illogical—processes through which Minor League Baseball has developed is necessary to understand its legal standing and position within the larger landscape of U.S. professional baseball. Although desegregation and globalization would not gain significant momentum until in U.S. professional baseball until after World War II, the structures of power that continue to disenfranchise Minor League players have their roots in U.S. professional baseball’s early history. Grounding more recent debates and developments in this early history highlights the intractable structures of power that have impacted professional baseball players writ-large and continue to have a direct impact on the labor conditions of Minor League players.</p> 
<p>Specifically, this section of the dissertation presents a labor history of Minor League Baseball through synthesizing qualitative and contextual information from a variety of legal documents, including Collective Bargaining Agreements, Official Rules, court cases, and Congressional record. By connecting those documents with data about teams and players, this section of the dissertation addresses the following research questions:
  <ul><li>How Minor League Baseball came to exist and develop within the larger structure of U.S. professional baseball</li>
    <li>The relevance or significant of Minor League Baseball within the larger structure of U.S. professional baseball, both in terms of numbers of teams and players</li>
    <li>What key developments or events in U.S. professional baseball history have shaped Minor League Baseball labor structures and conditions—and how</li>
    <li>How efforts at labor activism and organizing within U.S. professional baseball have impacted and overlooked Minor League baseball</li>
    <li>How a focus on post-WWII labor activism within Major League Baseball has overlooked Minor League players</li>
    <li>How shifting awareness of Minor League labor in recent years has impacted actual labor conditions</li></ul>
<div style="text-align: left">As mentioned previously, scholarship that does address Minor League Baseball often foregrounds a particular team, city, or league, rather than looking at large structures and broad trends. A notable exception is Daniel Gilbert’s *Expanding the Strike Zone: Baseball in the Age of Free Agency,* which looks at the larger scope of U.S. professional baseball to argue that “significant transformations in the structure of both work and territory in the baseball world” combined with “players in Major League Baseball (who) won new power in their industry through collective bargaining” resulted in “more flexible modes of control over the recruitment and development of future generations of athletes.”<sup><a href="#fn8" id="ref8">8</a></sup>  This dissertation takes up that framework to address the nuanced ways in which Minor League players have been impacted by larger structures of power in U.S. professional baseball, arguing the erasure of Minor League labor overlooks a significant portion—in fact the majority—of U.S. professional baseball labor.</p> 

## Section 2: Minor League Labor and Globalization
<p>This section of the dissertation uses spatial analysis and spatial data visualization to illuminate the ways macro- and micro-level trends in Minor League Baseball relate to and complicate MLB-dominated narratives around globalization in U.S. professional baseball labor. Using records from Baseball Reference’s website (run by Sport Reference, LLC), this section examines how individual players have moved through the Minor League system from the 1960s though the present. The University of Central Florida’s Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport has produced annual reports on diversity in Major League Baseball (MLB) going back to 2004 <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">(see Table 1) and while Society of American Baseball Research (SABR) records have tracked MLB demographics going back to 1947 <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">(see Figure 1)</a>, no research has substantively interrogated how foreign-born players move through Minor League Baseball’s professional development system.<sup><a href="#fn9" id="ref9">9</a></sup></p>
<p>Important emerging research frames U.S. professional baseball’s global or transnational reach as an aspect of the sport’s corporate structures and labor practices, as well as cultural politics. For example, Robert Elias’ *The Empire Strikes Out: How Baseball Sold U.S. Foreign Policy and Promoted the American Way Abroad* looks at the longer history of U.S. professional baseball’s global presence, going back to late-nineteenth century world tours, and traces the intersection of U.S. foreign policy and the cultural politics of U.S. professional baseball’s global presence.<sup><a href="#fn1=" id="ref1=10">10</a></sup>  Another significant work informing this dissertation is Daniel Gilbert’s *Expanding the Strike Zone: Baseball in the Age of Free Agency,* which links the post-World War II development of free agency in U.S. professional baseball with the sport’s increasingly global reach.<sup><a href="#fn11" id="ref11">11</a></sup>  Of particular relevance, both texts frame desegregation and globalization in U.S. professional baseball as aspects of the sport’s labor practices. However, studies that take up this framework rarely consider Minor League Baseball at-length. Centering Minor League Baseball in this global framework emphasizes the connection between U.S. professional baseball as a global business and the actual movement of human laborers across national boundaries.</p> 
<p>While Rob Ruck’s *Raceball: How Major League Baseball Colonized the Black and Latin Game* focuses on Major League Baseball’s relationship to other professional baseball organizations (i.e. professional leagues in Latin American countries and Negro League organizations in the U.S.), Adrian Burgos’ *Playing America’s Game: Baseball, Latinos, and the Color Line* focuses on the experiences of Latin American or Latino-identified players in U.S. professional baseball.<sup><a href="#fn12" id="ref12">12</a></sup>  Along with a range of histories on desegregation and the Negro League, these texts focus almost entirely on Major League Baseball in their framing of U.S. professional baseball labor. Minor League Baseball—if mentioned at all—is touched on only briefly, and few texts seriously consider Minor League Baseball’s importance and relevance.</p>
<p>What is lost in many of these analyses is the core intersection of U.S. professional baseball’s labor practices and the sport’s global reach.<sup><a href="#fn13" id="ref13">13</a></sup>  Focusing on specific players, regions, or periods demonstrates the nuanced complexity in baseball’s cultural politics and illustrates how baseball has developed outside the United States (and outside the umbrella of U.S. professional baseball). But, such studies fail to offer a sense of transnational perspective and scale, particularly as U.S. professional baseball’s labor practices become increasingly global or transnational. This dissertation seeks to consider the implications of U.S. professional baseball’s truly global presence and the sport’s long history of “national pastime” claims.</p>
<p>Existing American Studies scholarship offers approaches that examine how U.S. history is fundamentally linked with the nation’s position in a larger global community.<sup><a href="#fn14" id="ref14">14</a></sup>  Informed by those American Studies frameworks, this dissertation argues that Minor League Baseball is a dynamic, transnational site that can challenge static notions of a “national” pastime. Informed by the work of Kaplan, Pease, and others, this dissertation proceeds from the core belief that the colonial power structures and ideologies at work in U.S. history have been similarly present in U.S. professional baseball history. Through analyzing and visualizing player birthplaces, team locations, and player movement over time, this section of the dissertation makes the following arguments. First, that Minor League Baseball is a dynamic, central site where globalization in U.S. professional baseball labor has manifested. Second, that Minor League structures have developed in ways that facilitate giving U.S. professional baseball a distinctly global presence in its player development and recruitment efforts. Third, that despite the drastic demographic shifts that have taken place in the Minor Leagues since 1960, Major League demographics have not also changed to reflect that underlying transformation in the composition of Minor League teams and players.</p> 

## Section 3: Minor League Labor and Cultural Representation
<p>The first two major interventions of this dissertation focused on making visible the labor structures, practices, and history have shaped Minor League Baseball, using alternate data sources, methodologies, and modes of inquiry. This section of the dissertation addresses another aspect of baseball labor—promotion, marketing, and branding systems. By considering the alternate cultural domains made available and visible by digital technologies, this section of the dissertation analyzes the meanings those digital production spaces communicate about U.S. professional baseball’s social, cultural, and political significance.</p> 
<p>While fantasy baseball and baseball-related video games are manifestations of that trend, social media platforms have also emerged as critical sites where the labor of cultural production takes place.  This section of the dissertation examines cultural production and representation in the digital content created by and for communities affiliated with U.S. professional baseball. The arguments presented elsewhere in the dissertation focus on the development and globalization of Minor League Baseball. The third section builds on that foundation to look at the branded content professional teams produce about themselves, and how Minor League players are challenging those dominant messages by using those same production mechanisms to present alternate perspectives on the Minor League experience.</p>

# Data as Rhetoric, Argument, and “Fact”
## Data and the Digital Humanities
<p>This dissertation proceeds from the core belief that computational tools, data analysis, and data visualization are methods that are useful for qualitative interdisciplinary research questions. A rich body of scholarship that argues digital technologies can inform, shape, and offer meaningful contributions to humanities scholarship. As Schnapp and Presner argue in their “Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0,” digital tools and resources can address core humanities methodological commitments like “attention to complexity, medium specificity, historical context, analytical depth, critique and interpretation."<sup><a href="#fn15" id="ref15">15</a></sup>  In a moment when the sheer volume of available primary sources (textual or non-textual) overwhelms the capacity of traditional humanities methods, digital methods provide ways to engage with these sources, and animate that information in meaningful ways that would not be possible or easily accessible through traditional models for engaging sources.</p> 
<p>Lisa Gitelman, Bethany Nowviskie, Safiya Noble, and others have argued that the deluge of data forms and sources that are often unquestioned aspects of a digital world are themselves dynamic, fruitful objects of study and sites of inquiry.<sup><a href="#fn16" id="ref16">16</a></sup>  Even before the recent scholarly turn toward critical digital studies, library and information science offers a robust body of literature that argues the process of structuring, curating, and organizing data—even before analysis and visualization stages—is itself a form of intellectual labor that requires critical reflection on the provenance, context, and meaning of a particular data form. As Bowker and Star, and later Lampland and Star, have demonstrated in edited collections, how scholarship in any field—including digital scholarship—takes up the task of organizing its source material for analysis and interpretation represents a significant scholarly labor and contribution.<sup><a href="#fn17" id="ref17">17</a></sup></p>  
## Baseball and Data
<p>The core dataset for this project includes both biographical and transactional information about the players who have played U.S. professional baseball, covering the 1960 through 2017 professional seasons. As indicated by substantive fan interest in fantasy baseball and advanced statistical analysis of baseball metrics, the numbers associated with baseball have been and continue to be objects of fascination and significant meaning. The *New York Times’* Alan Schwarz wrote in 2006, “Like no other corner of American popular culture, baseball communicates in numbers.”<sup><a href="#fn18" id="ref18">18</a></sup>  As early as the 1860s, baseball’s promotional figures and cultural leaders—figures like Henry Chadwick and Albert Spaulding—worked extensively to give numbers associated with baseball heightened significance and meaning.</p> 
<p>That trend continued through the twentieth century. As Mitchell Nathanson writes, the increasing professionalization within Major League Baseball combined with the sport’s growing cultural significance to create a climate in which baseball numbers and data continue to be sites of contestation and ideological significance.<sup><a href="#fn19" id="ref19">19</a></sup>  Today’s baseball numbers have moved far beyond the frameworks and rhetorics used in the sport’s early days. New forms of coaching and team management exist alongside new media and marketing strategies. However, these structures continue to reinforce the heightened meaning and significance assigned to baseball numbers.</p> 
<p>The early days of organized professional baseball in the U.S. involved debates around how performance metrics and competitive statistics would be defined and calculated. But, the sport’s growth as a national phenomenon in the early twentieth century made baseball numbers and data objects of national conversation. From box scores printed in newspapers to performance awards for players, numbers governed most aspects of baseball’s cultural significance, including the vote counts used to determine which players would be elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame. Even before advanced analytics and data science approaches became ubiquitous across the professional baseball landscape, players, teams, coaches, and scouts used a variety of means to record, analyze, and visualize baseball data. From scouting reports that quantified various aspects of a player’s performance to color-coded hitting charts generated by hand, the primary source archive documenting U.S. professional baseball history is rife with data, recorded and preserved in a variety of material forms.<sup><a href="#fn20" id="ref20">20</a></sup></p>
<p>Baseball fans’ enthusiasm for this information led to a distinct subculture and community around baseball data and analytics emerging in the 1980s and 1990s. Publications like *Baseball Analyst* and *Bill James’ Statistical Abstract* emerged in the 1990s as a way for interested baseball fans to gather, curate, analyze, and interpret the baseball data teams and organizations had been recording for over a century. Bill James’ work creating and publishing the *Bill James Baseball Abstract* and the institutionalization of early fantasy baseball leagues provided visibility for the growing baseball-data aficionado community. Extensive baseball data collection has long been a part of the sport’s history, but data-driven decision making was largely absent from baseball’s formal labor practices until the 1990s and early 2000s. As Michael Lewis, Keith Law, and other baseball writers have documented, that shift within the fan community eventually garnered the attention of a new generation of professional baseball executives.<sup><a href="#fn21" id="ref21">21</a></sup>  Michael Lewis’ *Moneyball* provides an in-depth case study of how data-driven decision making and advanced statistical analysis challenged existing philosophies for evaluating and managing baseball labor, which relied on a scout’s player experience, personal experience, and subjective judgement to ascertain a player’s value.</p>  
<p>Baseball data has always been fraught with meaning. As Mitchell Nathanson argues, the backlash to using data and statistics in labor management offers a compelling example of U.S. professional baseball’s tendency to rely on tradition in the face of innovation.<sup><a href="#fn22" id="ref22">22</a></sup>  Restricting professional baseball’s decision-making practices as accessible only to an “insider community” resisted the larger democratization of fan engagement and participation taking place via the fantasy baseball and sabermetrics fan movements. As data-driven decision making and advanced analytics have become largely ubiquitous within professional baseball organizations, fan interest in baseball data has continued unabated. With internet technology becoming increasingly accessible in the 1990s, the grassroots fan communities of the 1980s evolved into web-based networks.</p> 
<p>One of those online communities, the Iowa Farm Report, was managed by Sean Forman, a baseball fan and Iowa native who was at the time a graduate student in mathematics at the University of Iowa.<sup><a href="#fn23" id="ref23">23</a></sup>  Building on his work with the Iowa Farm Report, Forman launched the Baseball Reference website in 2000, and it quickly became the baseball fan community’s go-to data resource. The innovative digital solution provided in Baseball Reference grew into Sports Reference, LLC, “A group of sites providing both basic and sabermetric statistics and resources for sports fans everywhere. Our aim is to be the easiest-to-use, fastest, most complete sources for sports statistics anywhere.”<sup><a href="#fn24" id="ref24">24</a></sup>  While a number of other baseball data resources and repositories have emerged since Baseball Reference’s launch, the site remains the leading publicly-available source of baseball data.</p> 
<p>Increased public interest in baseball data and fantasy baseball prompted another moment of decision for Major League Baseball’s executive organization. To go along with increased adoption of data-driven decision making and advanced analytics, Major League Baseball founded MLB Advanced Media (MLBAM) in 2000. Owned by the Major League owners, MLBAM started with providing a standardized web presence for Major and Minor League teams and has grown into what Forbes described in 2014 as “The Biggest Media Company You’ve Never Heard Of.” MLBAM is responsible for nearly twenty-thousand hours of live sports video streaming and a robust data analytics infrastructure.<sup><a href="#fn25" id="ref25">25</a></sup></p>  
<p>As part of that foray into digital marketing and potential revenue streams, MLBAM negotiated a five-year “interactive rights” deal with the MLBPA in 2005, a deal that gave players’ right to profit off their own digital representation or recreation, as well as ownership and control over professional players’ digital identities, to Major League Baseball’s executive organization. The fantasy sports market continued to grow, while MLBAM ran its own for-profit fantasy leagues and granted multi-million-dollar licenses to major sports media organizations like CBS and ESPN.  Those licenses allowed partner fantasy baseball operations to display player likenesses and team logos alongside player names and statistical information.</p> 
<p>The 2005 interactive rights agreement brought to a head growing tensions between MLBAM and smaller fantasy baseball operations. Those smaller operations argued First Amendment protections and information in the public record allowed them to utilize non-commercial forms of player data in for-profit fantasy sport ventures. In short, the informal policy followed by most smaller fantasy sports operators was that players’ likenesses and team logos were off limits, but the names of players and their statistical records should be fair game. MLBAM disagreed and used the 2005 agreement to argue that any fantasy baseball operation using player information and data was required to have a licensing agreement with MLBAM.</p>
<p>St. Louis-based CBC Distribution and Marketing Inc. ran a mid-sized fantasy baseball operation and, in 2006, challenged MLBAM’s attempts to monopolize the fantasy baseball market. According to CBC’s legal team, unlicensed fantasy leagues that were not using player likenesses or team logos were “’disseminating information to the public about baseball players no different than what a newspaper does.’”<sup><a href="#fn26" id="ref26">26</a></sup>  MLBAM’s specific objection in the case was rooted in the idea of a fantasy baseball league operation as “a business venture distinct from conventional journalism,” but the underlying question of who ‘owns’ baseball data was central in *C.B.C. Distribution and Marketing, Inc. v. Major League Baseball Advanced Media, L.P.*<sup><a href="#fn27" id="ref27">27</a></sup>  The U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, and the U.S. Supreme Court all upheld the initial verdict—that “’the names and playing records of major-league baseball players…(are) not copyrightable.’”<sup><a href="#fn28" id="ref28">28</a></sup></p>
<p>The legal framework for publicly-available baseball data remained largely unchallenged after the 2006 CBC lawsuit. But, how baseball data is made available for public consumption via digital platforms raises questions about the audience for and purpose of baseball data, and more broadly baseball data’s contemporary cultural significance. On one hand, the growth and capacity of MLBAM emphasizes the degree to which data analytics as a form of labor management has become an integral part of the U.S. professional baseball landscape. The noticeable growth in data-driven sport journalism and sport data analysis projects also indicate the baseball fan community’s continued interest in data-related projects.</p> 

## Data and Cultural Representation

<p>The ubiquity of sport data provider services like Baseball Reference and the legal protections that allow them to share sport data operate on the assumption that the data itself is a static object, and the ways in which it is organized and presented are merely questions of user experience and interface design. As Sean Forman stated in a 2016 interview, “’For me it’s really about the puzzle of figuring out what is the most useful way of presenting this information. Coming up with small touches that make things a lot easier for the user.’”<sup><a href="#fn29" id="ref29">29</a></sup>  In this framework, the decisions and cognitive processes that go into gathering, structuring, and presenting data are framed as technical questions and solutions, rather than issues of power, meaning, and representation.</p>
<p>This dissertation makes use of the abundance of baseball-related data generated by sport data providers. Indeed, the arguments this dissertation makes about Minor League Baseball labor would not be visible or discernable without the available underlying data that animates the project. However, as outlined in the preceding section, baseball data (and sport data more broadly) has most often been framed as a relatively neutral measure or record of achievement and performance. This dissertation complicates those frameworks by presenting baseball data as inflected by ideology and produced by human actors.</p> 
<p>As Johanna Drucker and others have argued, the process of identifying and declaring discrete information entities constitutes an act of information capture and interpretation.<sup><a href="#fn30" id="ref30">30</a></sup>  Lisa Gitelman’s *“Raw Data” Is An Oxymoron* edited collection makes a similar point from a variety of disciplinary valences; the notion of data as neutral erases the decisions and intellectual processes used in data collection, organization, and representation.<sup><a href="#fn31" id="ref31">31</a></sup> As Bowker and Starr point out, “not all classifications take formal shape or are standardized in commercial and bureaucratic products,” but even for ones that do—like baseball data calculations and measures—Bowker and Starr argue giving increased attention to the structures of power and ideology embedded in classification systems can make visible the structures of order and organization that shape information.<sup><a href="#fn32" id="ref32">32</a></sup></p>  
<p>As Drucker and other feminist critical geographers have argued, accepting visualization and mapping as forms of argumentation (or arguments themselves) fails to recognize or acknowledge “the context of such issues as maps as a medium of power, ontological power of maps and digital representations of place, authorship of maps, what gets to be represented and what is silenced, and what kind of information is conveyed and which is excluded.”<sup><a href="#fn33" id="ref33">33</a></sup>  Seeing “digital place-making as an outcome of contestation and social power” involves transparency and reflexivity about the scope and limits of digital methodologies.<sup><a href="#fn34" id="ref34">34</a></sup></p>
<p>As outlined elsewhere in this introduction, the mapping and spatial analysis portions of this dissertation rely on a bespoke dataset. The arguments presented in this dissertation emphasize the capacity of this data for opening up new areas of inquiry. However, this dataset concretizes players as discrete entries in the dataset, and links them with temporally- and spatially-bounded entities. In doing so, the dataset fails to make visible or incorporate more fluid, porous methods of identity formation that work across nation-state boundaries and other classifying structures. The underlying dataset also highlights the colonial structures of power that shape national borders, regional affiliations, and spatial classification systems. The mapping and spatial analysis deployed in this dissertation is predicated on the understanding that geographic labels and reflect a long history of colonial power, deployed in multiple spheres to enforce material and intellectual authority in ways that foreclose alternate frameworks for defining, understanding, and describing place.</p> 
<p>Analyzing globalization by focusing on players’ birth places relies on a fixed geographic affiliation that may not represent a player’s actual sense of cultural, racial, or ethnic affiliation. As Johanna Drucker argues, “such graphical tools are a kind of intellectual Trojan horse, a vehicle through which assumptions about what constitutes information swarm with potent force.”<sup><a href="#fn35" id="ref35">35</a></sup>  For Drucker, visualizations or aggregate representations of data must be seen as a type of knowledge representation and presented in ways that emphasize “the situated, partial, and constitutive character of knowledge production, the recognition that knowledge is constructed, taken, not simply given as a natural representation of pre-existing fact.”<sup><a href="#fn36" id="ref36">36</a></sup>  This dissertation endeavors to undertake spatial analysis and visualization ways that reflect Drucker’s “new approach” that acknowledges the “interpretive nature of knowledge” and “is conceived to embody qualitative expressions.”<sup><a href="#fn37" id="ref37">37</a></sup></p> 
<p>By presenting a history and geography of U.S. professional baseball labor, this project’s underlying dataset can seem to offer a totality of representation, the complete narrative about a particular dimension of U.S. professional baseball. Such a perception is an inaccurate interpretation of the arguments made in this dissertation and their scope. Specifically, the dataset used in this project focuses exclusively on players and teams affiliated with Major League Baseball, from the 1960 through 2016 seasons. The pre-WWII history of baseball is not visible in this analysis. Also absent is the wealth of professional and semi-professional teams not affiliated with Major League Baseball—a group that includes teams located within and outside the U.S. The rich history of amateur, collegiate, and youth baseball are not included in this dataset.</p> 
<p>Defining a dataset’s scope does not undercut the validity or significance of arguments made using that data. However, specificity about what is being represented in a data-driven analysis is necessary to avoid further erasure of already-marginalized sporting communities. As insightful scholarship has demonstrated, decentering predominantly male, commodified forms of organized sport offers significant contributions and insights to sport history and sport studies.<sup><a href="#fn38" id="ref38">38</a></sup>  More broadly, the scholarship of Lauren Klein, Catherine D’Ignazio, and others models an approach to data analysis and visualization informed by critical cultural studies.<sup><a href="#fn39" id="ref39">39</a></sup>  These frameworks emphasize the need to engage data in ways that rethink binaries, embrace pluralism, examine power and aspire to empowerment, consider context, legitimize embodiment and affect, and make labor visible.<sup><a href="#fn40" id="ref40">40</a></sup></p>

## Methods

<p>This dissertation proceeds from the understanding that digital tools and approaches, with their capacity to curate and visualize new primary source archives and highlight new critical intersections, are vital for humanities scholarship. As data visualization and computer science scholar Enrico Bertini argues, our understanding of the potential of data analysis and visualization has shifted, as digital technologies and data visualization resources have made it possible to analyze and visualize data in more complex, interactive ways.<sup><a href="#fn41" id="ref41">41</a></sup>  In Bertini’s framework, data analysis can function in three main ways—to inspire, explain, or analyze.<sup><a href="#fn42" id="ref42">42</a></sup> Building on Bertini’s foundation, this dissertation operates within the framework that data visualization as a form of analysis can itself serve as a form of argumentation, in which “the main goal…is to extract information out of data with the purpose of answering questions and advancing understanding.”  While explanatory visualizations can also be illustrative or serve an evidentiary purpose, those visualizations largely work to confirm what has already been argued elsewhere, or in another medium. In contrast, analytical visualizations work “to understand the data in the first place.”<sup><a href="#fn43" id="ref43">43</a></sup></p> 
<p>Using a variety of data sources and analysis and visualization methods, this dissertation makes a content-based argument about U.S. professional baseball labor’s intersection with globalization, power, and representation. Scholars have addressed the problem of professional baseball labor through a variety of scholarly approaches. Literature that speaks to various facets of U.S. professional baseball labor—specifically globalization and integration—are key discourses that inform this dissertation. The literature review highlights how existing scholarship on U.S. professional baseball labor regularly overlooks Minor League Baseball as relevant or significant for baseball labor practices. In contrast, my dissertation proceeds from the core belief that Minor League Baseball is a dynamic, crucial site for baseball research and can speak to probative research questions on U.S. professional baseball’s labor history, cultural politics, and ideological significance—questions that have previously been addressed by studying MLB teams and players.</p> 
<p>By using digital tools and approaches to make that argument, this dissertation also demonstrates the relevance of digital methods and data analysis for interdisciplinary humanities scholarship. As part of a larger conversation taking place within digital scholarship and digital humanities, this dissertation works to make visible the technological and human structures necessary to undertake large-scale digital scholarship projects. Rather than relegating the labor of organizing, describing, and transcribing to the acknowledgements section, this dissertation builds on a robust body of literature in library and information science to argue those aspects of any scholarly project—in this case a digital project—are themselves a form of intellectual labor and scholarly contribution. Through framing data curation, analysis, and visualization as scholarly activities, this dissertation takes up a truly interdisciplinary DH approach by using an engagement with a quantitative dataset to enrich how scholars understand and perceive connections between labor, power, and ideology in U.S. professional baseball.</p> 

### Data Sources and Structures

<p>As mentioned previously, the underlying data for this project is gathered from Baseball Reference’s online website. However, that data in its standard public-facing form does not facilitate the type of analysis and inquiry undertaken in this project. While the full details of the data wrangling and curation process are addressed in Appendix A’s technical whitepaper document, this section of the introduction briefly outlines the rationale and key decisions for the data that is the foundation of this project.</p>
<p>As shown in <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">(see Figures 2-7)</a>, information about player birthplaces and dates does not exist publicly in tabular form. This structure prevents an aggregate analysis of player biographical information, since the data about player birthplaces is not connected with the data about their playing careers and transactions. Additionally, the playing transaction information included on a specific player’s page does not include relevant descriptive information about teams that player played for. Details like classification level and team location are also needed to facilitate in-depth analysis of aggregate data trends <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">(see Figures 2-5)</a>. Other site pages include roster information about a specific professional team in a specific season and do connect player birthplaces with the record of a specific team’s roster <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">(see Figures 6-7)</a>. However, the team-level data is isolated on season-specific pages, making it difficult to analyze change over time across teams and seasons. Additionally, the team-level data does not include additional relevant information like the team location and classification level, preventing or inhibiting an analysis of large-scale aggregate trends and change over time. While the data that supports this project is publicly available, it is not publicly available or accessible in a way that allows the type of large-scale analysis undertaken in this project.</p>
<p>Initially, data collection was done manually, copying and pasting online data into Excel and reformatting to enable cross-table links resembling a database structure <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">(see Figures 8-9)</a>. Additionally, initial efforts were made by the University of Iowa’s Digital Studio for Scholarship and Publishing toward developing a web crawling script that would automate the one data scraping, given the potential for error and the amount of time and labor necessary to manually collect the online data. However, a closer inspection of Sports Reference LLC’s terms and conditions <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/appendices/B">(see Appendix B).</a> raised a number of questions about the legality of manually gathering the data or using an automated scraping method to compile the data. At this point, no further attempt was made to automate data gathering or gather the data manually until Baseball Reference, Sports Reference LLC, and Hidden Game Sports (third party data licenser and host) had been contacted to clarify the terms of use and gain permission to use the data for this project.</p> 
<p>Given the fragmented and unconnected way much of the data used in this project lives online, collecting or gathering it manually would have been a time and labor intensive process, delaying the overall progress of the project. Given the time and labor necessary to gather the data manually, the Digital Studio (and I) were interested in procuring a bespoke dataset customized to include the data points related to this project’s research questions.</p>
<p>Original efforts to gather the data manually focused on the aspects of facets of the data needed to respond to the project’s research questions, specifically player places and dates of birth, teams played for, team classifications and affiliations, and team locations. Initial efforts to gather this data manually utilized data structure outlined in Figures 8 and 9. However, once the decision was made to move away from manual or automated data collection toward a bespoke licensed dataset, this original structure was abandoned, given the limited feasibility of significantly restructuring the licensed dataset. After reaching a licensing agreement with Hidden Game.  This agreement is documented in <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/appendices/C"> Appendix C.</a> The licensed dataset was delivered via email as a zipped folder with CSV three CSV files—Playing, Locations, and Affiliations. The data included in those three CSV files included the elements and structure illustrated in Appendix D.</p>
<p>In the original data formation, there were multiple data redundancies, first with player biographical information being duplicated in the “Playing” table to correlate with multiple transaction records for specific players. Additionally, the “Locations” table includes location information for Major and Minor League Teams, but other relevant locations—specifically player birthplaces—are located elsewhere in the table data structure. A crucial needed piece of information—a unique identifiers for teams—is not included in the original dataset, and the affiliation level information is included in “Playing” table. See <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">Figure 10</a> for a relational schema (RS) for the original data.</p>
<p>While redundancies in the player biographical information had been removed, information about teams, affiliations, classifications, and team locations was not logically organized within the data-table structure. While the licensed data as originally delivered included the data points needed for the research questions undertaken in this project, the data did not exist in a structure or organized form that allowed or made possible the type of inquiry central to this project. While the primary motivation for many of these manipulations or restructurings was an attempt to wrangle or mash the data into a structure that could be imported into a database, or at least allow for coherent cross-table connections, it is important to remember that manipulations of data or reconfiguring of data structure is predicated on or necessitates a position of authority over the data and what it represents. Determining what fields or data points are and are not significant is not a neutral or impersonal act—decisions about structuring data reflect a broader notion of knowledge and power in relation to what data (especially complex quantitative data) represents and communicates.<sup><a href="#fn44" id="ref44">44</a></sup>  In these data manipulations, the goal of these manipulations was to preserve the fields that were statistically significant and central or useful for the central research questions driving the larger project. <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/introduction">Figure 11</a> presents the final relational schema, and <a href="https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/appendices">Appendix A</a> walks through the various transformations of the data structure.</p>
<p>While the dataset described previously is the foundation for the overall dissertation project, additional datasets have been gathered from other sources to supplement the foundational dataset. The first content section of the dissertation focuses on animating and making visible labor structures around U.S. professional baseball labor, with a focus on Minor League Baseball and the structures and forces that govern its conditions of labor. In addition to information about the numbers of players and teams, and the change over time in those numbers, this section of the dissertation also addresses representation in the labor structures and organizations that impact or shape professional baseball conditions of labor.</p>
<p>While the history of the Major League Baseball Players Association (MLBPA) has been written elsewhere and is discussed more fully in the first content section, another focus of the argument in this the composition of the Player Relations Committee (PRC) that negotiates collective bargaining agreements and other labor negotiation terms and agreements. While this body has been discussed in scholarly literature and some degree of mainstream press coverage, little research has focused on the composition of this committee in relation to the larger pool of U.S. professional baseball players.</p>
<p>Portions of the data analysis and visualization in this first section look at the members of the PRC. This data was gathered from the primary source Collective Bargaining Agreement documents, and the additional information about place of birth and playing career was gathered manually from Baseball Reference. Represented in tabular form, the PRC data includes the terms and fields defined in [Appendix D](https://github.com/kwaldenphd/dissertation/tree/master/appendices/D). An expanded discussion of the technical components of the project, including more in-depth documentation of data structures, platform choices, deposit procedures, and preservation agreements is addressed in the technical whitepaper that accompanies the project.</p> 
# Conclusion
<p>This dissertation uses digital sources and methods to enrich how scholars understand and perceive connections between labor, power, and ideology in U.S. professional baseball. Through engaging a quantitative dataset alongside critical qualitative theoretical and methodological frameworks, this project also argues for Minor League Baseball’s cultural. Using a methodological framework informed by critical digital humanities and library and information science, project centralizes Minor League Baseball within the broader landscape of U.S. professional baseball to make a three-fold argument.</p> 
<p>First, that Minor League Baseball’s labor history has been governed by power structures in which management’s interests prevail over the Minor League players rights. That trend has continued, even as Major League players achieve greater autonomy and agency via unionization and collective bargaining. A sub-thread of that first argument argues the MLBPA’s work on behalf of Major League players has largely overlooked or failed to advocate effectively for Minor League players.</p>
<p>By examining the relationship of labor and globalization within U.S. professional baseball since the 1960 season, the second argument centers Minor League Baseball as a dynamic site of globalized labor. A close examination of the U.S. professional baseball labor force in relation to globalization challenges characterizations of U.S. professional baseball as the “national pastime.” A romanticized view of baseball as any sort of national unifier overlooks the inequitable labor structures at work in the Minor League system and the degree to which globalized labor is a central, essential component of the Minor League system.</p> 
<pThe third argument looks at the labor represented by digital forms of cultural production, specifically in relation to social media. In the twenty-first century digital media landscape, social media constitutes a key strategy used by individual teams and the U.S. professional baseball apparatus to construct specific, strategic messages about the institution’s cultural significance. Some sport media scholars have described social media as a mechanism that increases fan proximity to the “real world” experience of professional athletes. One sub-thread of this larger argument contends management’s use of social media in fact obscures or minimizes attention to the lived experiences of Minor League players. Another sub-thread of this argument argues recent Minor League player initiatives have used those same social media platforms to communicate alternate messages about Minor League laborers’ experiences. Alongside earlier arguments presented in the dissertation, this third argument emphasizes the degree to which the dominant cultural meanings associated with Minor League Baseball and U.S. professional baseball writ-large most often tend to overlook the material realities, historical conditions, and structures of power that shape the conditions experienced by a vast majority of the sport’s labor force.</p>

# Endnotes
<sup id="fn1">1. Roberto González Echevarría, *The Pride of Havana: A History of Cuban Baseball* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001); Rob Ruck, *Raceball: How the Major Leagues Colonized the Black and Latin Game* (Boston, MA: Beacon, 2012).<a href="#ref1" title="Jump back to footnote 1 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn2">2. Josh Chetwynd, *Baseball in Europe: A Country by Country History* (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2008); George Gmelch, *Baseball without Borders: The International Pastime* (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2006).<a href="#ref2" title="Jump back to footnote 2 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn3">3. Robert Obojski, *The Rise of Japanese Baseball Power* (Radnor, PA: Chilton Book Co., 1975); Joseph A. Reaves, *Taking in a Game a History of Baseball in Asia* (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2004).<a href="#ref3" title="Jump back to footnote 3 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn4">4. Daniel A. Gilbert, *Expanding the Strike Zone: Baseball in the Age of Free Agency* (Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 2013), 3.<a href="#ref4" title="Jump back to footnote 4 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn5">5. Ibid., 5.<a href="#ref5" title="Jump back to footnote 5 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn6">6. Arthur T. Johnson, *Minor League Baseball and Local Economic Development* (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1995); Rebecca S. Kraus, *Minor League Baseball: Community Building through Hometown Sports* (New York: Haworth Press, 2003); Jon C. Stott, *Minor Leagues, Major Boom: Local Professional Baseball Revitalized* (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co., 2004); Neil J. Sullivan, *The Minors: The Struggles and the Triump of Baseball's Poor Relation from 1876 to the Present* (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1990).<a href="#ref6" title="Jump back to footnote 6 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn7">7. Richard Lapchick, et al, [“The 2017 Racial and Gender Report Card: Major League Baseball,”](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228180228/https://www.tidesport.org/copy-of-nfl) *Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport*; Mark Armour and Daniel R. Levitt, [“Baseball Demographics, 1947-2012,”](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228180259/https://sabr.org/bioproj/topic/baseball-demographics-1947-2012) *Society for American Baseball Research.*<a href="#ref7" title="Jump back to footnote 7 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn8">8. Gilbert, 5.<a href="#ref8" title="Jump back to footnote 8 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn9">9. Mark Armour and Daniel R. Levitt, ["Baseball Demographics, 1947-2012,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228180259/https://sabr.org/bioproj/topic/baseball-demographics-1947-2012) *Society for American Baseball Research,* n.d.<a href="#ref9" title="Jump back to footnote 9 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn10">10. Robert Elias, *The Empire Strikes Out: How Baseball Sold U.S. Foreign Policy and Promoted the American Way Abroad* (New York: The New Press, 2010).<a href="#ref10" title="Jump back to footnote 10 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn11">11. Gilbert.<a href="#ref11" title="Jump back to footnote 11 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn12">12. Adrian Burgos, *Playing America's Game: Baseball, Latinos, and the Color Line* (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2007); Ruck, *Raceball: How the Major Leagues Colonized the Black and Latin Game.*<a href="#ref12" title="Jump back to footnote 12 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn13">13. González Echevarría; Ruck, *The Tropic of Baseball: Baseball in the Dominican Republic*; Obojski; Reaves; Chetwynd; Gmelch.<a href="#ref13" title="Jump back to footnote 13in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn14">14. Amy Kaplan, *The Anarchy of Empire in the Making of U.S. Culture* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005); Ann Laura Stoler, *Along the Archival Grain: Thinking through Colonial Ontologies* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009); Amy Kaplan and Donald E. Pease, eds., *Cultures of U.S. Imperialism* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994), 34.<a href="#ref14" title="Jump back to footnote 14 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn15">15. Jeffrey Schanpp et al., "Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0," *Multitudes 59,* no. 2 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3917/mult.059.0181.<a href="#ref15 title="Jump back to footnote 15in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn16">16. Lisa Gitelman, ed., *"Raw Data" Is an Oxymoron, Infrastructures* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013); Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism *(New York: New York University Press, 2018).<a href="#ref16" title="Jump back to footnote 16 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn17">17. Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star, *Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008); Martha Lampland and Susan Leigh Star, eds., *Standards and Their Stories: How Quantifying, Classifying, and Formalizing Practices Shape Everday Life* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2009).<a href="#ref17" title="Jump back to footnote 17 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn18">18. Alan Schwarz, [“Baseball Is a Game of Numbers, but Whose Numbers Are They?”](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228180407/https://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/16/sports/baseball/16license.html) *New York Times* (16 May 2006). <a href="#ref18" title="Jump back to footnote 18 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn19">19. Mitchell Nathanson, *A People's History of Baseball* (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2012).<a href="#ref19" title="Jump back to footnote 19 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn20">20. [Tony Gwynn Hitting Charts, 1982-1987.](https://collection.baseballhall.org/PASTIME/tony-gwynn-hitting-charts-1982-1987-0) BA MSS 96. Created by Whitey Herzog. *National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum*; [Alvin McGrew Scouting Report, 1968.](https://collection.baseballhall.org/PASTIME/alvin-mcgrew-scouting-report-1968-may-27) BA MSS 156. Created by Lorenzo Davis. *National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum*; [Pittsburg Diamonds Versus Sonoma Stompers Scorecard, 2016.](https://collection.baseballhall.org/PASTIME/pittsburg-diamonds-versus-sonoma-stompers-scorecard-2016-july-22-0) BA MSS 209. *National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum*; [Down On the Farm Minor League Statistical Booklets.](https://collection.baseballhall.org/PASTIME/willie-runquist-minor-league-statistical-booklets) BA MSS 300. Created by Willie Runquist. *National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum*.<a href="#ref20" title="Jump back to footnote 20 in the text.">↩</a></sup> 
<br></br><sup id="fn21">21. Keith Law, *Smart Baseball: The Story Behind the Old Stats That Are Ruining the Game, the New Ones That Are Running It, and the Right Way to Think About Baseball* (New York: Harper Collins, 2017).<a href="#ref21" title="Jump back to footnote 21 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn22">22. Nathanson, 205.<a href="#ref22" title="Jump back to footnote 22 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn23">23. Tom Snee, [“Baseball statistics website Baseball-Reference.com born at UI,”](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228180807/https://now.uiowa.edu/2017/03/baseball-statistics-website-baseball-referencecom-born-ui) *Iowa Now* (29 March 2017).<a href="#ref23" title="Jump back to footnote 23 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn24">24. [“Sports Reference: Sports Stats, Fast, Easy, and Up-to-Date,”](https://web.archive.org/web/20190224075755/https://www.sports-reference.com/) *Sports Reference* (2000-2018).<a href="#ref24" title="Jump back to footnote 24 in the text.">↩</a></sup> 
<br></br><sup id="fn25">25. Maury Brown, [“The Biggest Media Company You’ve Never Heard Of,”](https://web.archive.org/web20190228180930/http://www.forbes.com/) Forbes (7 July 2014). <a href="#ref25" title="Jump back to footnote 25 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn26">26. Rudy Telscher quoted in: Alan Schwarz, [“Baseball Is a Game of Numbers, but Whose Numbers Are They?”](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228180407/https://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/16/sports/baseball/16license.html) *New York Times* (16 May 2006).<a href="#ref26" title="Jump back to footnote 26 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn27">27. Ibid.<a href="#ref27" title="Jump back to footnote 27 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn28">28. *C.B.C. Distribution and Marketing, Inc., Plaintiff/Counter Defendant, Vs. Major League Baseball Advanced Media, L.P., Defendant/Counter Claimant, and Major League Baseball Players' Association, Intervenor/Counter Claimant.* <a href="#ref28" title="Jump back to footnote 28 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn29">29. Dan Levy, [“Meet the Mt. Airy Guy Behind Baseball Reference, Pro Sports Stats Empire,”](https://web.archive.org/web/20190228181050/https://billypenn.com/2016/10/11/meet-the-mt-airy-guy-behind-baseball-reference-pro-sports-stats-empire/) BillyPen (11 October 2016). <a href="#ref29" title="Jump back to footnote 29 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn30">30. Johanna Drucker, "Graphical Approaches to the Digital Humanities," in *A New Companion to Digital Humanities,* ed. Susan Schreibman, Raymond George Siemens, and John Unsworth (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2015).; B. Aragona, "New Data Science: The Sociological Point of View," in *Data Science and Social Research: Epistemology, Methods, Technology and Applications,* ed. N. Carlo Lauro, et al., Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization (New York: Springer, 2017). <a href="#ref30" title="Jump back to footnote 30 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn31">31. Gitelman.<a href="#ref31" title="Jump back to footnote 31 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn32">32. Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star, *Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 1-3.<a href="#ref32" title="Jump back to footnote 32 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn33">33. Marianna Pavlovskaya, "Digital Place-Making: Insights from Critical Cartography and GIS," in *The Digital Arts and Humanities,* ed. Charles Travis and Alexander von Lunen (Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2016), 3.<a href="#ref33" title="Jump back to footnote 33 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn34">34. Ibid.<a href="#ref34" title="Jump back to footnote 34 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn35">35. Drucker.<a href="#ref35" title="Jump back to footnote 35 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn36">36. Ibid.<a href="#ref36" title="Jump back to footnote 36 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn37">37. Ibid.<a href="#ref37" title="Jump back to footnote 37 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn38">38. Martha H. Verbrugge, *Active Bodies: A History of Women's Physical Education in Twentieth-Century America* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012); Mary Louise Adams, *Artistic Impressions: Figure Skating, Masculinity, and the Limits of Sport* (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011); Susan K. Cahn, *Coming on Strong: Gender and Sexuality in Women's Sport* (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2015); Pamela Grundy, *Learning to Win Sports, Education, and Social Change in Twentieth-Century North Carolina* (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2014); Jaime Schultz, *Qualifying Times: Points of Change in U.S. Women's Sport* (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2014); *Women's Sports: What Everyone Needs to Know* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).<a href="#ref38" title="Jump back to footnote 38 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn39">39. Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein, "Feminist Data Visualization," in IEEE (Baltimore, MD: 2016); *Data Feminism,* Open Knowledge Futures Group (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019).; Johanna Drucker, "Information Visualization and/as Enunciation," *Journal of Documentation 73,* no. 5 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-01-2017-0004.<a href="#ref39" title="Jump back to footnote 39 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn40">40. Drucker, "Information Visualization and/as Enunciation."; D'Ignazio and Klein, "Feminist Data Visualization."; D’Ignazio and Klein, *Data Feminism.*<a href="#ref40" title="Jump back to footnote 40 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn41">41. Enrico Bertini, ["From Data Visualization to Interactive Data Analysis,"](https://web.archive.org/web/20181227214921/https://medium.com/@FILWD/from-data-visualization-to-interactive-data-analysis-e24ae3751bf3) *Medium,* 28 November 2018.<a href="#ref41" title="Jump back to footnote 41 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn42">42. Ibid.<a href="#ref42" title="Jump back to footnote 42 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn43">43. Ibid.<a href="#ref43" title="Jump back to footnote 43 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
<br></br><sup id="fn44">44. Johanna Drucker, "Diagrammatic Form and Performative Materiality," *The Journal of Electronic Publishing 19,* no. 2 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3998/3336451.0019.208; "Database Narrative in Book and Online," *The Journal of Electronic Publishing 18,* no. 1 (2015). https://doi.org/10.3998/3336451.0018.113; "Graphical Approaches to the Digital Humanities."; "Non-Representational Approaches to Modeling Interpretation in a Graphical Environment," *Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 33,* no. 2 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx034.<a href="#ref45" title="Jump back to footnote 45 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
