[<h3>From Sport Reference LLC’s terms and conditions:</h3>](https://www.sports-reference.com/termsofuse.html)

<h4>1. Proprietary Rights.</h4>

Sports Reference LLC, its subsidiaries, or affiliates, (collectively referred to as "SRL"), own or license the data, content, graphics, forms, artwork, and other material for this Site (the "Content"), as well as the selection, coordination, arrangement, and organization and enhancement of the Content (also, the "Content") for this Site. Except as indicated, this Site and Content are owned or licensed by SRL, and are © 2000-2015 Sports Reference LLC or third party licensors. All rights reserved. Any use, reproduction, or distribution of this Site or Content without SRL's advance written consent is prohibited, except, however, you may download one copy of these materials, and you may print one copy of these materials for your use in learning about, evaluating, or acquiring SRL's or its licensees' or licensors' services or products, provided that you include a complete copy of this entire page. If you believe that SRL or any user of this Site has infringed your copyright in any material way, please notify our Copyright Agent at sf@sports-reference.com.
<br></br>
<h4>2. Teachers and Search Engines.</h4>
Notwithstanding other terms of this agreement, we grant the right to teachers to print pages from the Site for distribution to students, provided that proper attribution is given to the URL on the Site where the material originated. We also grant the operators of search engines permission to use robots to copy materials from the site for the sole purpose of creating publicly-available searchable indexes of the materials, but not caches or archives of the materials. Search engines are expected to follow the guidelines set forth in the robots.txt file that we provide. Except as specifically provided in this paragraph, you agree not to use or launch any automated system, including without limitation, robots, spiders, offline readers, or like devices, that accesses the Site in a manner which sends more request messages to the Site server in any given period of time than a typical human would normally produce in the same period by using a conventional on-line Web browser to read, view, and submit materials. SRL reserves the right to revoke the exceptions granted in this paragraph, either generally or in specific cases, as well as the right to deny service to any user found violating the provisions of this paragraph.
<br></br>
<h4>6. Site Content.</h4>
You may not frame, capture, harvest, or collect any part of the Site or Content without SRL's advance written consent. SRL may make changes to the Content, this Site, or the products or services made available in connection with this Site at any time, with or without notice, and makes no commitment to update any of these items. Despite our best efforts to provide accurate information in the Content, errors may occur. Before acting on any information appearing on the Site, you should verify its accuracy. Please feel free to contact SRL (sf@sports-references.com) regarding errors.
